Cryptology is the study of secret codes. In speaking of cryptology, we discuss two
main branches: cryptography is concerned with the writing of messages in secret code
and the creation of these methods, while cryptanalysis is concerned with reading
encrypted messages by breaking secret codes.
Ancient times saw many examples of cryptography. Over three thousand years
ago, Egyptian scribes made use of hieroglyphic transformations to obscure the meaning of written messages. Mesopotamian and Babylonian scribes employed similar
techniques to render cuneiform tablets unreadable to the uninitiated. The Greeks
employed cryptography (and the closely related steganography, which is concerned
with concealing the existence of communication rather than content) for military and
tactical purposes. Even the K¯ama-s¯utra of ancient India touches on cryptography,
listing secret writing as one of the sixty-four fundamental arts. Hundreds of other
examples occur in ancient civilizations; in short, cryptography has appeared more or
less spontaneously in every culture in which literacy has become widespread [45].
Cryptanalysis, on the other hand, took considerably longer to develop as a rigorous
subject of study. The earliest surviving descriptions of systematic methods of codebreaking come from fifteenth century, in the Arabic encyclopedia S. ubh. al-a ‘sha [45].
It gives the first known written description of the technique of frequency analysis,
where the frequencies of letters and letter groupings of a language are used to unravel
secret codes.
Cryptology has played a role in political and military matters from medieval times
through the 20th century. Perhaps most famous is the cryptologic effort of Great
Britain and the United States during World War II. The efforts of thirty thousand
employees at Britain’s Bletchley Park in cryptanalyzing Germany’s Enigma transmissions is said to have shortened the war by several years [45], and it led to the
development of the first digital computer, Colossus. Similar efforts in the United
States to break Japanese codes aided American intelligence in the war, convincing
American authorities of the importance of cryptologic expertise and eventually leading to the establishment of the National Security Agency in 1952.
With the rise of digital computer networks in the 1970s, securing communication
became an increasingly important task in the private sector as well. The needs of the
banking industry, in particular, for secure digital communication became especially
urgent. Developments at IBM led to the design of Lucifer, one of the first public
ciphers for computer communications. The National Security Agency offered several
improvements to Lucifer, and in 1975 the National Bureau of Standards presented the
modified version as the Data Encryption Standard, or D.E.S. Thus the first public
standard for encryption began to gain widespread use.
A method of securing communication is called a cryptosystem. The sender encrypts (or enciphers) a message using an encryption algorithm together with a secret
key. This produces a ciphertext which is sent to the recipient. The recipient, who
also possesses a key, receives the ciphertext and decrypts (or deciphers) using the key
to recover the original message, called the plaintext.
In the history of cryptology up to 1975, all cryptosystems required the sender and
the receiver to agree beforehand on the same key, a key that had to be rigorously
protected from exposure to an adversary. This is known as symmetric or secret key
cryptography. Arranging to share a secret key between two parties is often a difficult
problem, and does not scale well to scenarios in which many individuals or computers
might communicate with each other.
In 1976, Martin Hellman, a professor at Stanford University, and Whitfield Diffie, a
graduate student, introduced the concept of asymmetric or public key cryptography in
their seminal paper New Directions in Cryptography. They speculated that a method of encryption might exist in where the encryption key differed from the decryption
key. In such a scheme, a user’s encryption key could be announced to the public;
any outsider could obtain this public encryption key and use it to send encrypted
messages to the user. Since only the user would posses the decryption key, only she
could obtain the decryption of the message. Public key cryptography also opened
doors for many other applications, such as digital signatures and electronic cash.
The concept of public key cryptography circulated in the research community for
some time before the first practical proposal for such a scheme was made.1
In August 1977 the RSA public key cryptosystem, named after inventors Ron Rivest, Adi
Shamir, and Len Adleman, was introduced in Martin Gardner’s column on Mathematical Games in Scientific American [32]. The RSA cryptosystem, outlined in
Section 3.1, has survived over twenty years of study by cryptanalysts in the public
sector, and it is the most widely used public key cryptosystem in the world. It is
used, among other places, in the SET protocol [84] for secure credit card transactions
and the SSL protocol [30] for secure communication on the Internet.
Public discussion and research in cryptography in business and academia started
in the last quarter of the 20th century, and continues at a furious rate. New methods
for encryption are publicly announced; researchers then study these methods for
weaknesses by applying the tools of cryptanalysis.2 Only after intense public scrutiny
does a new cryptosystem gain a sense of legitimacy. Studying and using methods
for breaking cryptosystems is an essential step in the development of new designs for
more secure cryptosystems. By learning how things break, we learn how to make
them stronger.
It is in this spirit that this thesis is written. This work uses mathematical tools
to study the RSA public key cryptosystem and several variants. We use tools from numerical algebra and the geometry of numbers to get our results. Algebraic cryptanalysis has proven to be one of the most effective methods in the study of public
key cryptosystems.